.TH ZC-STDLIB 7 "2026-01-15" "Zen C 0.1.0" "Standard Library"
.SH NAME
zc-stdlib \- Zen C Standard Library Overview
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Zen C Standard Library provides essential functionality for systems programming,
covering collections, I/O, networking, and concurrency.
.SH MODULES
.TP
.B std/vec.zc
Growable dynamic array
.B Vec<T>
with automatic resizing and memory management.
.TP
.B std/string.zc
Heap-allocated
.B String
type with UTF-8 support and ergonomic manipulation methods.
.TP
.B std/map.zc
Generic Hash Map
.B Map<K, V>
implementation.
.TP
.B std/set.zc
Generic Hash Set
.B Set<T>
implementation.
.TP
.B std/queue.zc
FIFO queue (Ring Buffer) implementation.
.TP
.B std/stack.zc
LIFO Stack
.B Stack<T>
implementation.
.TP
.B std/io.zc
Standard Input/Output utilities, including
.B print
and
.B println
internals.
.TP
.B std/fs.zc
File system operations (read, write, create, delete files and directories).
.TP
.B std/path.zc
Cross-platform path manipulation utilities.
.TP
.B std/env.zc
Process environment variable access and manipulation.
.TP
.B std/process.zc
Process execution and management (spawning subprocesses).
.TP
.B std/net.zc
Networking primitives (TCP, UDP, HTTP, DNS, URL).
.TP
.B std/thread.zc
Threading and synchronization primitives (Mutex, CondVar).
.TP
.B std/time.zc
Time measurement, sleeping, and monotonic clocks.
.TP
.B std/json.zc
High-performance JSON parsing and serialization using cJSON.
.TP
.B std/option.zc
Optional values
.B Option<T>
(Some/None).
.TP
.B std/result.zc
Error handling
.B Result<T, E>
(Ok/Err).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR zc (1),
.BR zc (7)
